The late John XXIII remains today as the quintessential darling of the liberal establishment, more than a half century after his death.  But ever since the 1960s, numerous alert Catholics have questioned the very legitimacy of “Pope” John, because of the open revolution he set in motion, which, from its inception, was in opposition to the teachings of all the popes, going back to St. Peter.  John’s “official” rebellion against the ancient ecclesiastical order that had existed up to his time, precipitated the greatest crisis in the history of the Church.  To ascertain how a “pontificate” like that of John XXIII’s could have come about, it is necessary to thread together certain key historical events that were either long forgotten, or thoroughly hidden from the Catholic public during the latter part of the 20th Century.

Letter of Prince Scortesco  
 
An early clue to unraveling the Roncalli conundrum came from letters that surfaced in France decades ago concerning an aberration long rumored to have occurred in the 1958 papal conclave.   The source of the story was the German Prince, the late Paul Scortesco, who was a cousin of Prince Steno Borghese, a prominent member of the Vatican's Noble Guard and “President” of the 1963 Conclave.  Scortesco had obtained information from Borghese, which prompted him to write two letters in 1976 about the secret details of the 1958 and 1963 Conclaves.  A segment of one of these letters that was published by the French periodical, Introibo, is reproduced in part below:

 “In the case of the election of John XXIII [1958] and of Paul VI [1963], there were communications [with the outside].  It was thus known that there were several ballots in the first [conclave] which resulted in the election of Cardinal Tedeschini and in the second [conclave], Cardinal Siri . . . ” 

It should be noted that, in the same year in which Prince Scortesco had penned his letters on the conclaves, he died in a suspicious fire at the Franco-Romanian embassy in Paris from which he should have easily escaped.  His death was quickly classified as “accidental” by Parisian authorities before it could be thoroughly investigated.  It is also known that, at the time he died, Paul Scortesco was about to publish evidence of Paul VI’s membership in the Masonic Lodge.

Cardinal Tedeschini

Who was Cardinal Tedeschini?  A brief biography of the prelate follows:

“Tedeschini, Frederico (1873-1959), Cardinal.  Born in Antrodoco, Italy, on October 12, he studied at the Pontifical Seminary, was ordained in 1896, and became a clerk in the papal secretariat of state.  He was appointed chancellor of apostolic briefs by Pope St. Pius X in 1907, was substitute secretary of state from 1914 until 1921 when he was appointed apostolic nuncio to Madrid and titular archbishop of Lepanto.  He served in this capacity until 1935, when he was created cardinal.  He became Archpriest of St. Peter’s Basilica, cardinal datary in charge of papal bulls, papal legate to the Marian Congress in Peru in 1954, and died in Rome on Nov. 2, 1959.”  

His Eminence Frederico Tedeschini was known to have been a close friend of Pope Pius XII.   The holy prelate represented Pope Pius as papal legate at the ceremonies held at Fatima on October 13, 1951, commemorating the thirty-fourth anniversary of the great Miracle of the Sun.  On that occasion, Cardinal Tedeschini first announced to Catholics worldwide the news that the Holy Father, Pius XII, himself had seen the Miracle of the Sun in the Vatican Gardens four times during the previous year.

Persistent Rumors

But the preponderance of evidence strongly suggests that, during the 1958 Conclave, external intervention was directed against Giuseppe Siri and not Frederico Tedeschini.  The newly elected pope was overthrown five minutes after he received the required majority of votes and accepted office.  During that same conclave, one or more subsequent “elections” took place, but it was Angelo Roncalli who then emerged on the papal balcony at the end of the third day.  Thus, the illegal suppression of the canonically elected pope would have invalidated the attempted election of a later candidate, despite the published results of the conclave and acceptance of the alternate “pope” by the entire Catholic world  (See chapter: Rules of the Conclave).  Could the 85-year old Cardinal Tedeschini have been the first pick of the conclave in 1958, or was he simply one of the alternative choices of the Cardinals, following the overthrow of the previously elected pope, during the three-day conclave?  If the aged Cardinal Tedeschini had been “elected” as a substitute “pope,” it is likely that he would have refused, knowing that his “acceptance” would have been a usurpation of the papal office and mockery of the rightful pope? Roncalli, however, would have suffered no scruples of conscience over violations of Church law so as to inaugurate his agenda from the Church’s commanding heights.

The orderly transfer and continuation of universal jurisdiction from a deceased pope to his lawful successor was grievously disrupted for the first time in over 500 years.  The conclave intrigue was the “Enabling Act” by which a Freemason (previously admitted into the Masonic Workshops of Istanbul, Turkey during the 1930s as well as the Parisian Lodge of the “Rosicrucians” in France during the 1940s) was to be installed upon the Chair of Peter in Rome, making possible the flood of apocalyptic evils which followed.  Strong charges?  To be sure.  But the evidence presented in the following pages speaks for itself.

An earlier “John XXIII”

No disaster of similar magnitude for the papacy or the Church had happened since the final years of the Great Western Schism (1378-1418).  The last antipope produced by the schism, Baldasare Cossa, usurped the papal office during the exile of the true pope, and for a time carried out his usurpation in Rome itself.  It is interesting to note that Cossa, a fifteenth century antipope, would share an important trait with his modern day namesake.  For in 1958, the new papal pretender, Angelo Roncalli, who was known to the Rosicrucian Lodge by the code name, “Brother John,” would assume the very same designation chosen by the antipope, Cossa, in the year 1410.  Both would take the name “John XXIII.”  
 
In not all details were the two John XXIIIs alike, however.  During the confusion of the Great Western Schism, to which Cossa had contributed, there were at one time as many as three claimants to the papacy.  This was simply a case of two counterfeit popes openly vying with the authentic Vicar of Christ for control of the physical appearances of the pontifical office and all its perceived earthly powers and advantages.

What Roncalli’s sponsors seemed to have had in mind five centuries later was something far more sinister.  For, their plan was to hijack by force the highest pinnacle of authority in the Church, under the cover of conclave secrecy, in order to put in its place a malevolent influence capable of deceiving and corrupting nearly all the faithful throughout the world.

According to the Dominican historian, Father Perrotta, Frederico Tedeschini was among the Cardinals who supported Giuseppe Siri’s candidacy to become pope.  Many observers at that time believed Siri was destined to become the new pope.  Thus, Paul Scortesco’s report of the “election” of Cardinal Tedeschini in 1958 may refer to the desperate attempts of the Cardinals to put someone on the Chair of Peter in the aftermath of the coup d’état against the rightful pope.  Had the elderly Tedeschini been elected first, instead of Siri, and became the true pope in October 1958, but then secretly replaced by Roncalli, his death, just thirteen months after the conclave, would have left the Church without a legitimate head for forty-two months and eighteen days, while an antipope remained ensconced in the papal apartments.  A three and a half-year period with no true pope would have been the longest such occurrence since the record interregnum between Popes Marcellinus and Marcellus I (304-308).  But even this would not have served the ultimate plans of the Lodge, for they knew from history that the death of a true pope inexorably leads to the succession of another true pontiff.  However, the existence of a young, healthy, captive pope, known only to the Lodge, would preclude the election of another true pope, perhaps for many years, for there cannot be two valid pontiffs at the same time.  Further, a pope cannot validly abdicate while under duress.

The suppression and exile of the Vicar of Christ in 1958 was infinitely more harmful to the Church than any schism or heresy which had occurred in Her past.  For the next 30 years, virtually none of the faithful were aware that the office of the rightful pontiff had been stolen by a usurper.  This massive deception precipitated a revolt within the Church’s structures, led by an agent of Antichrist, who was perceived by the faithful as the true Vicar of Christ.  Moreover, his usurpation of nearly five years inaugurated a string of papal impostors who deprived the Church of her rightful head for over a generation.
 
The anticipated Siri papacy 

To comprehend how these events unfolded, one must study the undercurrents which preceded the voting for the pontiff who would follow Pius XII.  Contrary to the majority of liberal, mass-media sources that have maintained that, over the last thirty-two years, there was no clear favorite of the papal electors in 1958, the truth has at times slipped out that indeed, there was a logical successor to Papa Pacelli.  On the day Pope Pius XII died, The Houston Press announced:

“If the Sacred College of Cardinals follows tradition, the next pope will be either: Giacomo Cardinal Lercaro, Archbishop of Bologna, renowned for the vigor of his opposition to both Fascists and Communists; or Giuseppe Cardinal Siri, youngest of all the Cardinals and Italy’s most popular prelate. . . papal history in the last 400 years indicates the new pontiff probably will be an Italian, under 68 years old, and with a record of achievement as an executive as well as a priest. . . Both Cardinal Lercaro and Cardinal Siri fit this pattern.  Among the 55 living cardinals, none other has all the traditional qualifications. . . Lercaro is 67 and a relentless fighter . . . as a priest in Genoa, he helped the anti-Mussolini underground and hid Allied soldiers in his rectory.  Cardinal Siri is equally vigorous and even more popular.  He is only 51.  A priest at 22 and a bishop at 37, he became famous for his ability to settle labor disputes peacefully.  He also is a leader of Catholic intellectuals, a lecturer and author . . . ”  

Author Jim Bishop wrote about Pope Pius’ emerging heir-apparent almost two years before the fateful conclave:

“Siri is a strong candidate.  He is only 50 and is the most popular cleric in Italy.  He was born in Genoa and came from a laboring family.  At 22 he was a priest and at 37 he was a bishop.  During the war, he organized soup kitchens for the poor.  He is a master of labor-management problems.  It is said that he has settled more disputes, without strikes, than any other man in Italy.”  

When Siri died three decades later, Rome correspondent Desmond O’Grady echoed Jim Bishop's earlier remarks, and provided additional details about the Cardinal “who could have been pope.”:

“ . . . Cardinal Siri participated in four conclaves and was twice thought the likeliest “papabile” [potential pope] . . .  When Pope Pius XII fell out with Giovanni Battista Montini, who had worked for him for years in the Vatican Secretariat of State, it was presumed Cardinal Siri would become Pope Pius’ successor.   Pope Pius made him a bishop at 38 and a cardinal at only 47 . . .  Cardinal  Siri resembled Pope Pius XII in several  ways . . . Slim and bespectacled, Cardinal Siri  was conservative theologically and a disciplinarian and moralist . . .  he was a dominant figure in his native Genoa as its bishop for 41 years.  He is credited with persuading the retreating German forces in World War II not to blow up the port, and he also did much for his city’s disadvantaged.  He was accepted by both sides as a mediator in the shipbuilders-wharf laborers’ disputes until his retirement as archbishop last year.  He was loved as well as respected by many in the port city . . .”  

In Italy, so strongly felt was the inevitability of Siri’s election in 1958 that the prophecy of St. Malachy, describing Pius’ successor as “Pastor et Nauta” (Shepherd and Sailor), was commonly attributed to the illustrious Archbishop of Genoa.  The maritime city had been his life-long home, where he was born the son of a dock worker and janitor.  It was the most important seaport in the country, and the birthplace of Christopher Columbus.  A Genoan newspaper would write:

“No one better than Siri could symbolize this motto:  ‘He is a pastor of highest virtues, a captain of the ship, born and raised on the sea.’”  

The Cover Story

What were the attitudes of the Cardinals who were preparing to elect the new pope with the obscure nautical epigraph assigned to him since antiquity?  One assessment of the mood at that time, published shortly after the conclave, can be found in the book, Pope John XXIII; His Life and Character, by Rev. Paul C. Perrotta, O. P. (1959, Thomas Nelson & Sons, New York, pages 135-139).  Although slanted in favor of Roncalli, the author’s interpretation of the events, just prior to the conclave, tend to confirm other reports of Cardinal Siri’s early dominance among the candidates being carefully scrutinized by the papal princes of 1958.

The Cardinals were charged with the responsibility to elect the person they believed was most worthy to head the Church.  Of particular interest is Father Perrotta’s description of the qualities the electors sought in the new pope:
 
“In the beautiful discourse delivered by Monsignor Antonio Bacci, Secretary of Briefs to Princes, during the Solemn Mass of the Holy Spirit on the morning of the opening of the conclave, which we can compare to a keynote speech, it was pointed out to the Cardinals that they had the solemn duty of electing ‘not only a teacher and pastor, but a father as well.’

“In effect, it was a pointed recommendation.
 
“It was a counsel to give to the Church a priestly pope rather than a political one. ‘One,’ the Monsignor had continued to say, ‘who will take to his heart, as Christ Jesus had done, the cause of the poor, and of the distressed of earth.’  He ended by calling for the election of a ‘holy pontiff’ thus stressing the primary qualification that a candidate must possess, since his piety was a need greater than any political sagacity, administrative genius, or diplomatic skill.

“Many factors had to be studied and appraised.  What is the political condition of the world?  What is the religious mood of man?  What power has arisen that has to be dealt with, either by show of power or by diplomacy?  What moral dangers are present?  What are the missionary needs?  What persecutions confront the Church?  Would this particular cardinal be acceptable to that sizable and influential bloc of nations?

“Is he presentable for audiences?  Does he speak a variety of languages?  Is he old enough or young enough?

“The grapevine has intimated that fulfilling all the essential conditions was Cardinal Siri Archbishop of Genoa, and that the Pacellians were solidly behind him. It even named the Pacellians: the Italian Cardinals Ruffini, Tedeschini, Fumasoni-Biondi, Pizzardo, Siri, Mimmi, Micara, Canali, Ottaviani, Cigognani; the American Cardinals, Spellman and McIntyre; the two German ones, Frings and Wendel: the two Portuguese, De Gouveia and Cerejeira; the two Brazilians, De Barros Camara and Da Silva; the two Argentinians, Caggiano and Copello; the two Canadians, McGuigan and Leger; the Cuban, Betancourt, the Ecuadorian, Torre and the Irish, D'Alton . . .”

“The other camp, the so-called ‘riformisti’ [reformers], included, it is presumed, Cardinals Lercaro, Ciriaci, Dalla Costa, and Valeri among the Italians; all the six French Cardinals, also the Belgian, the Syrian, the Chinaman, the Indian, the Pole, the Chilean, and the Armenian . . .”

At this point in his narrative, Fr. Perrotta indicated that the conclave suddenly took a 180-degree turn.  For, once locked inside the Sistine Chapel, the very electors who were “solidly behind” Siri are supposed to have completely and voluntarily reversed their preferences concerning the future pontiff, or so Father Perrotta contended:    

“ . . . Once a dent was made in . . . [the Pacellian] bloc, it was easy to guide the voting to a more acceptable neutral.   The leading candidate of the Pacellians, Cardinal Siri, for all his qualifications, including his age, 52, discovered that this very virtue of youth was militating against him with the archconservatives.  They felt that it just would not do to have so young a pope.  Furthermore, he had the reputation of being too austere.  This encouraged a further break in the big bloc. By the third day, it became apparent that if a worthy compromise candidate could be offered, he would stand a good chance of success in short order.

“It has been suggested that the compromise would be in electing an elderly pope among the neutral group.  An elderly pope, not calculated to live too long, would be acceptable to the two groups, who then would hope to consolidate their respective positions before the day of another conclave . . .

“The compromise candidate was now put forward.  He was the Patriarch of Venice, Cardinal Roncalli, classed as a neutral . . .

“ . . . He had a fine reputation as a man of good common sense, an indefatigable worker, a charming personality perfectly at home with brilliant diplomats and with peasants and factory workers. His captivation of the French nation and his administrative record in Venice pulled great weight. The Church had enjoyed the fine services of an aristocratic pope.  The times counseled a change. The proletarian world had to be assured that the Church is not an exclusive champion of the rich and lordly . . . The background of the Patriarch of Venice was admirably suited to the need, and the more the Cardinals reflected on it, the more it became apparent to them that they had in this sharecropper’s son the man to win the masses.

“How soon after his name was seriously presented did the trend to accept him show itself we do not know.  All we know is that when the twelfth ballot was taken Cardinal Roncalli had won the necessary two-thirds majority plus one, and the white rings of smoke that poured out of the chimney told the world that the Cardinals had agreed on a successor to Pope Pius XII.”  
 
The paragraphs quoted above more or less reflect the accepted establishment version of the pivotal conclave events in question.  But not having been a witness himself, Father Perrotta had to rely heavily upon unsubstantiated rumors, some of which may have been spread by active agents of disinformation.  Distorted accounts of the conclave events would help to provide a cover for the manipulated results.  Father Perrotta’s evaluations were rife with the same contradictions found in other reports which followed the “party line,” and went unchallenged.   Perhaps the discrepancies were not obvious at that time, but only stand out today because of recent disclosures of previously suppressed evidence, now pertinent to this investigation.  In any case, those who had first-hand knowledge of what actually went on, with few exceptions, remained silent, taking refuge under the “seal” of the conclave.

Fr. Perrotta admitted that Siri satisfied all the criteria deemed necessary for the type of man the Cardinals wanted as the chief shepherd of the Church.  But then he asserts that Siri’s bloc of cardinals, the conservative Pacellians, who “were solidly behind him,” quickly abandoned him because of his “youth,” as if his age of fifty-two had just been discovered!  This is particularly hard to fathom as the Church had just passed through an agonizing ordeal lasting four years during the deteriorating health of the old and sickly Pius XII.  And at seventy-seven, Roncalli was only five years younger than the pope whom the Cardinals had just buried.  But, even more imponderable is the claim that these “conservatives,” under the presumed guidance of the Holy Ghost, would have voluntarily switched their loyalties from the one Cardinal who embodied all they had hoped for in the new pontiff, to another who was actually far removed from that ideal.

Of no small importance to the prestige of the papacy would be the outward appearance of the pontiff.  To say that he should be “presentable for audiences” was an understatement.  Cardinal Siri’s physical traits and ascetic bearing, like Pius XII, would exemplify the very image of a pope.  Fr. Perrotta implied that once a similarity in social background could be drawn between Siri and the aristocratic Pacelli (which is contradicted by the fact that Siri was the son of a janitor) a total break with the past was promoted.  It was to be made visually complete by the short, rotund physique of the Venetian Patriarch.

Monsignor Bacci counseled for a pope who was truly concerned for “the poor” and “distressed of earth.”  A Genoan newspaper had described Siri as “indefatigable as an organizer of social services for the poor and homeless.”  Through the soup kitchens he set up all over Italy during the war years and after, as many as ten thousand hot meals were served each day.  On the morning he received the red hat in Rome, Siri, via radio, would implore his faithful in Genoa not to forget their countrymen who had remained impoverished by the war:

“With this announcement of my appointment as cardinal, I ask you not to think of me, but to remember those who are still without a home and are still unemployed.”  

As for Roncalli, there can be found no comparable relief effort in his background, other than his wartime preoccupation with supplying fraudulent baptismal certificates to thousands of Hungarian Jews, who were hiding from the Nazis.  Putting aside the moral implications of such deception, he cared not if any of the Jews practiced the Catholic Faith, even though some of them had actually been baptized by nuns in Budapest.  In 1958, various secular groups that were traditionally hostile toward the Church, such as the World Jewish Congress and the B’nai-b’rith, the Masonic lodge reserved to Jews, carried on a covert campaign for Roncalli.  Because of past favors, they regarded him as an ally who could be counted on for future services, even if it meant violating the Church’s principles as well as Divine Law.

These Masonic organizations had long plotted to neutralize the Church and impose an atheistic, socialist government on Catholic Italy, as they had done in Russia, by enlisting the destitute into the revolt.  Their strategy was necessarily anti-Siri.  How could they possibly hope to eclipse the Church and “appeal to the poor” if Italy’s universally recognized and true champion of the poor was sitting on the Chair of Peter?  Roncalli’s deficiencies would have to be minimized and Siri’s attributes portrayed as liabilities.

Father Perrotta stressed that the Cardinals had been encouraged to seek a “holy,” “priestly” pope as opposed to a “political” one, that his “piety” would be more vital than “diplomatic skill” or “administrative genius” and above all that he should be a “father” to the Church.  A career diplomat, Roncalli had been an apostolic visitor to Bulgaria, apostolic vicar and delegate to Turkey and Greece, and also nuncio to France.  He had little to no pastoral experience prior to his appointment as Patriarch of Venice just five years before the conclave, yet his “administrative record” now “pulled great weight” and the requisite of priestly piety would be suddenly overshadowed by his “charming personality.”  On the other hand, Giuseppe Siri’s thirty years as pastor, teacher, peacemaker and true friend of the destitute suddenly counted for nothing.

That there were “moral dangers” and “persecutions” from which the Church needed a defender was implicitly admitted.  Siri, who dutifully warned the faithful against the prevalent errors of his time and who opposed all innovations in the sacred liturgy, was suddenly “too austere” (apparently meaning, too strict), yet both the Scripps-Howard News Service and author Jim Bishop said that Siri was “the most popular cleric in Italy.”  Now, Roncalli was to be presented as someone “more acceptable [?] . . . who had a fine reputation as a man of good common sense.”

What Father Perrotta failed to tell his readers was that the Holy Office had, for years, maintained a dossier on Roncalli, which read:  “Angelo Roncalli - Suspected of Modernism.”   The file dated back to 1925, when Roncalli, who was known for his unorthodox teachings, was abruptly removed from his professorship at the Lateran Seminary in mid-semester and shipped off to Bulgaria, thus beginning his diplomatic career.  Of particular concern to the guardians of the Faith had been his continuing, close association with the defrocked priest, Ernesto Buonaiuti, who was excommunicated for heresy in 1926. 

When he was nuncio to France, Roncalli had appointed his close friend, the thirty-third degree Freemason Baron Yves Marsaudon, as head of the French branch of the Knights of Malta. The incident was a major scandal for the Pacelli Papacy, but the pope was led to believe that Roncalli had been an innocent dupe.  

When Roncalli was elevated to the College of Cardinals in 1953, the ceremonial red biretta was placed upon his head by Pius XII, at the Pope’s summer residence at Castel Gandolfo.  Not content with accepting the Cardinal’s hat from the hands of the pope only, Roncalli insisted upon going through the ceremony again in Paris.  On this second occasion, he received the red hat from the notoriously anti-clerical Vincent Auriol, president of the Masonic, Fourth Republic of France (whom he had described as “an honest socialist”) claiming observance of an ancient custom.  But this privilege had formerly been reserved to Catholic Monarchs, not the successors to the Masonic revolutionaries who had overthrown and executed them.  Upon reception of the Cardinal’s biretta from the hands of Auriol (said to have been “one of his [Roncalli’s] dearest friends”), Roncalli jested to the Socialist:

“Now with this red beret, I am more ‘red’ than you, my dear Vincent.”  

At Parisian social functions, Roncalli was frequently seen fraternizing with the Soviet Ambassador, M. Bogomolov, even though the envoy’s government had resumed its pre-war policy of brutal extermination of Catholics in Russia.  He was also known as a “good friend” and “confidant” of Eduard Herriot, Secretary of the anti-Catholic, Radical Socialists, of France.   

The leading Cardinals of the Roman Curia must have been aware of Roncalli’s Communist sympathies.  Roncalli’s reputation as a suspected Modernist would also make absurd the claim that the Prefect of the Holy Office, Alfredo Cardinal Ottaviani, “…had sought Roncalli’s election as a ‘transitional’ pope,” an assertion of biographer Peter Hebblethwaite in his book, Pope John XXIII, Shepherd Of The Modern World.  In another work, The Year of Three Popes, Hebblethwaite reported that Siri (who most sources say was allied with Ottaviani) “fought a rude battle with Roncalli in the 1958 Conclave.”

The White Smoke  

As these dire events transpired behind the closure of the conclave, there were indications to the outside world, which hinted that the normal conclave procedure had been aborted.  For, on the evening of October 26, 1958, white clouds of smoke billowed out of the Sistine Chapel stovepipe and Vatican Radio announced that a pope had just been elected.  But after a half-hour had passed and no one came forward onto the papal balcony, another message was broadcast that the signal had been a mistake. “Vatican authorities were at a loss to explain the confusion,” wrote historian Joseph Breig, whose choice of words to describe that unusual scene in October 1958 now seems to have had a double meaning:   

“White smoke indicating a new pope, (and) gray, showing no agreement came five minutes apart, as darkness came over the Vatican.”  

Breig’s book, like some of the other early Roncalli biographies published in 1958, made only scant mention of the incident, and the stories of the conclave that were published months or years later made no reference to the anomaly whatsoever.  But before it could be intercepted and quashed, a detailed account of the suspicious spectacle went out that night over the Associated Press newswire service, which is quoted, in part, below:
 
“VATICAN CITY (AP) - Cardinals balloted Sunday without electing a pope.  A mix up in smoke signals made it appear for about half an hour that Pius XII’s successor had been chosen. For a time, 200,000 Romans and tourists in huge Saint Peter’s Square were certain the church had a new pontiff.  Millions of others who listened to radios throughout Italy and Europe also were certain.  They heard the Vatican radio speaker shout exultantly, ‘A pope is elected.’

“The scene around the Vatican was one of incredible confusion.  White smoke from a little chimney atop the Vatican is the traditional signal announcing the election of a new pope.  Black smoke indicates failure.  Twice during the day smoke billowed from the chimney. At noon the smoke at first came white but it quickly turned unquestionably black.   This was the sign the Cardinals had failed to elect a pope on the first two ballots.   At nightfall white smoke billowed from the slender chimney for a full five minutes.   For all the outside world knew, a new pontiff had been chosen.

“Clouds of smoke were caught in searchlights trained on the Sistine Chapel chimney. ‘Bianco! Bianco!’ roared many in the crowd. ‘White, white.’

“The Vatican Radio announced the smoke was white.  The announcer declared the Cardinals at that moment probably were going through the rites of adoration for a new supreme pontiff.   For a long time Vatican Radio stuck to its insistence the smoke was white.

“Even high Vatican officials were fooled.   Callori di Vignale, governor of the conclave, and Sigismondo Chigi, the conclave marshal, rushed to take up the positions assigned to them.  The Palatine Guard was called from its barracks and ordered to prepare to go to St. Peter’s Basilica for [the] announcement of the new Pope’s name.  But the guard was ordered back to barracks before it reached the square.   The Swiss Guard was also alerted.

“Chigi, in an interview with the Italian radio, said uncertainty reigned in the palace.  He added that this confusion persisted even after the smoke had subsided and until assurances were received from within the conclave that black smoke was intended.  He said he had been at three other conclaves and never before seen smoke as varied in color as Sunday’s.   He told newsmen later he would arrange to have the Cardinals informed of Sunday's smoke confusion in the hope that something can be done to remedy the situation Monday.

“Priests and others working within the Vatican grounds saw the white smoke. They started to cheer.  They waved kerchiefs enthusiastically, and figures of conclavists – cardinals’ assistants - in the windows of the apostolic palace waved back.  Possibly they too believed a pope had been elected.

“The crowd waited in agony of suspense. Any pope elected would ordinarily appear on the balcony within twenty minutes. The crowd waited a full half-hour now wondering whether the smoke was meant to be black or white.  Doubt set in swiftly. Many in the vast crowd began to drift away. But still there was confusion. News media had flashed around the world the word that a new pope had been chosen.

“Telephone calls poured into the Vatican, jamming its exchange. As time wore on and doubts increased, the callers all asked one question: “Black or white?”

“After a half hour, radios began to clatter excitedly that the answer was still uncertain. Only well after the time when a new pope should have appeared on the balcony above St. Peter’s Square was it certain that the voting would have to resume Monday at 10 a.m. (3 a.m. CST).  The crowd now aware of this, dissipated quickly.  Grayish wisps of smoke still spiraled from the chapel chimney . . .” 

The Catholic press in England also reported on the white smoke and Vatican Radio’s initial announcement that the new pope had been elected 26 October 1958: 

“Too few people realize how easy it is to get the Vatican Radio on the medium waveband (196.2 metres) on any average wireless set in this country.  It used not to be so, but so it has been for a year now, since the late Pope inaugurated the powerful new transmitters at Santa Maria di Galeria, and nothing was easier last Sunday than to sit in London listening to the excited uncertainty of the announcer about the colour of the smoke.  At five o’clock by our time – six o’clock in Rome – he suddenly said, ‘The smoke is white . . . there is absolutely no doubt.  A Pope has been elected.  Habemus papam.’  But then the smoke seemed to turn black, and he said that perhaps one ought to wait for confirmation of the news; then it was plainly white again, a great cry of ‘Evviva il Papa’ arose from the crowd in the Piazza, and the announcer threw caution to the winds; the white smoke, he said, had been too much, and too steady, to leave room for doubt.  Then caution crept back again and he said that only when the lights went on in the Hall of Benedictions could they feel certain that a Pope had been elected.  But, he insisted, the slightly dusky colour of the white smoke could only be due to a technical difficulty of some sort; it was too abundant, there was too much of it, for anyone to think otherwise.  Yet the minutes ticked on and no lights appeared; it was twenty past five before the announcer really began to think that a mistake must have been made after all.”  

To prevent unauthorized communications from going in or out of the conclave, Swiss Guards were to be posted at each passageway, including the turntables, which connected the Sistine Chapel with the conclave kitchen.  Therefore, it is perhaps more than coincidental that the Vatican discharged one of the Swiss Guards that very night and sent him back to Switzerland the next day.  The unusual action was reported by United Press International:

“Vatican City.  October 27 —  The Sacred College of Cardinals failed for a second straight day today to elect a new pope as successor to the late Pope Pius XII.  Black smoke emerging from the special chimney atop the Sistine Chapel signaled that the Cardinals had failed to agree on a new pontiff after eight ballots in two days.

“Guard Arrested —  Simultaneously it was disclosed that a soldier of the Swiss Guard watching over the conclave was placed under arrest yesterday for laxity in performance of his duty.  Vatican sources said he was expelled from the guard and was expected to return to Switzerland.  His defense was described as a lack of understanding of his duties . . .”  
 
It is evident that someone was elected pope at 6 P.M. on 26 October 1958, and accepted office, otherwise, none of the events described above by the press would have occurred.  The persistent rumors that Giuseppe Siri had been elected Supreme Pontiff, but was prevented from taking command of the Church, were privately confirmed by Siri, according to individuals who had interviewed him during his final years.  Seven months before his death, Siri implied that he had been unanimously elected at the ’58 Conclave, in a statement published by his last biographer, the Italian journalist, Benny Lai.  (See chapter: “I Have Asked The Forgiveness Of God.”)

In July, 1993, this author interviewed Father Jean-Marie Char-Roux, a former Vatican official and intelligence officer, and obtained an important piece of the ’58 Conclave puzzle.   The aged priest claimed that Siri had been elected and accepted office, but was intimidated into stepping aside, without actually abdicating.  According to Fr. Char-Roux, a threat by the Soviets to assassinate all the bishops imprisoned in the gulags, was delivered to Siri and the Cardinals by Cardinal Tisserant, five minutes after the acceptance of office by the new Pope.  Conclave ministers had already begun to burn the ballots with dry straw in the Sistine Chapel stove, sending up white smoke to announce the election of the pope.  Even as the thunderous cheers of the crowd outside could be heard by those in the Sistine, a group of cardinals in league with Tisserant commanded the ministers to change the mixture in the stove to wet straw in order to produce black smoke.  When the conclave officials refused the order to send out a false signal that would indicate no electoral results, a group of Cardinals brushed the monsignors aside and began to dump wet straw into the stove.  Thereafter, a “shoving match” ensued over control of the stove, and the alternating combustibles that were being put into it, causing the smoke to vary from white, to black, to white again, and finally to gray.  

In her unpublished memoirs, a Vatican news correspondent, whose career spanned 50 years, summarized the rumors that circulated among informed journalists in October 1958:

“Siri was alleged to have been elected at the conclave of 1958, from which, instead, came out Roncalli. The three well-known smoke signals, white, black, and then, finally, white, had aroused not a little perplexity and the same comment throughout the whole of the Italian peninsula: Who had been elected at the first white smoke?

Everyone in Genoa insisted, even from the first day:  ‘It most certainly was Siri.’  Could he have abdicated?  Had he been forced out?  Was it politics or the Holy Ghost?  The mystery remains yet today.  However, the [new] Vatican which burst unexpectedly before our eyes was a totally different Vatican from that of Pius XII, who had condemned Communism, excommunicating whoever had collaborated in any way with the atheists.  The excommunication was surely still legitimate when the new pontificate opened its arms to the Soviets, even as Roncalli was hailed, in a shameless manner, as the “good Pope.” 


The search for an “interim” pope 
 
At the beginning of the second day of scrutinies, the Siri bloc, though most likely demoralized, very probably still possessed its electoral majority.  Whether or not another attempt was made to place Giuseppe Siri on the papal throne is unknown to this author.  But in any case, Siri would remain forced off the Chair of Peter for the duration of the conclave.  Once this reality was accepted by his supporters, they may have turned to another cardinal considered allied with him.

As the conclave continued into a second and third day of balloting, there were news reports of the possibility of the Cardinals settling for an “interim (or temporary) pope.”  Fr. Perrotta suggested that the reformers may have begun to press for a “compromise” candidate, or one who was acceptable to both the “Pacellian” cardinals that had favored Siri, and the “reformisti” who wanted a complete break with the Church’s past.  A bitter stalemate may well have caused the idea of a “caretaker” or “interim pope” to begin to be taken seriously by the weary cardinals, who desperately wanted to bring the conclave to a conclusion.  

The supposed strategy of those who had sought to break Siri’s hold on the conclave, from its outset, through the ploy of a “transitional” pope was described as follows:

“ . . . What this meant was well put by a French abbot, who was ‘close to’ Cardinal Achille Lienart, archbishop of Lille.  He was countering the candidature of Cardinal Giuseppe Siri, archbishop of Genoa, who was fifty-two.   If elected, he could be pope for forty years.  ‘What we need,’ said the abbot, ‘is an old man, a transitional pope.  He won’t introduce any great innovations, and will give us time to pause and reorganize.  In that way the real choices that cannot be made now will be postponed.’  Of course, the consensus that was building up about a caretaker pope did not point inevitably or only to Roncalli.  There were other suitable candidates for a do-nothing papacy.” 

To the conservatives, the concept of putting an old man on the throne who would make no changes might have been an appealing alternative to further prolonging the deadlocked conclave, and conceivably visualized in the aforementioned, eighty-five-year-old Frederico Tedeschini, who was a collaborator and friend of Giuseppe Siri.  From early youth, he was educated in Rome and his priestly service to the government of the Church spanned five pontificates.  He was the only living Cardinal created “in petto”; for a special reason, Pope Pius XI had originally appointed him in secret.  As a cardinal bishop, he was among the five highest-ranking members of the Sacred College.  In his capacity as archpriest of St. Peter's Basilica, he had established a close association with the Roman people, who reverently referred to him as the “host of the San Pietro.”  Under normal circumstances, the idea of a “Pope Tedeschini,” as a transition between Pius XII and the relatively young Giuseppe Siri, might have been well received by the conservative curial cardinals.

But what was being described to the outside world as an “interim pope,” was quite different from what the shaken Cardinals were considering as a temporary seat warmer for the papal chair.  Twice the papal constitution Vacantis Apostolocae Sedis, had been read to the Cardinals before the conclave, and they had sworn an oath to uphold its provisions.  They knew and understood its conditions and stipulations, and thus were certainly aware that a second election during that conclave would be invalid.  For this reason, it is quite likely that, for a time, none of the Cardinals, being seriously considered to succeed Pius XII, would consent to being placed upon the Chair of Peter in a sham election following the overthrow of the duly elected Pope.

When and by whom the name of Tedeschini was first advanced is not known by this writer, but it is clearly stated in Scortesco’s writings that during one of the ballots he was elected, presumably after Siri’s alleged fourth ballot majority vote.  Other reports also suggest that Cardinal Agagianian was elected at one of the scrutinies.  But this does not mean that either Cardinal would have accepted the result of such a vote.  For, each Cardinal knew that, by so doing, he would be the central figure in the greatest fraud of the century.  The consciences of the individual Cardinals, which inhibited each from assuming the external symbols of the papal office under such illegitimate conditions, ran counter to their collective urgency to find someone among their group who would agree to put on the white cassock and walk out onto the papal balcony.  Then, a stunning “reversal of fortunes” suddenly came about which forever changed the course of history for the Church.

By the third night of the frightful 1958 Conclave, Roncalli apparently made it known that he would be willing to accept the tiara, even if under clouded circumstances.  Roncalli must have seemed like a savior to the naïve and exhausted Cardinals, who were desperate to end their confinement.  But in actuality, he was a schemer and co-conspirator in the plot to vitiate the conclave, and to deprive the Church of its rightful pontiff.

The “fix”

Although Roncalli had hardly been mentioned as a serious candidate for the papacy prior to the election, he wrote a letter to Giuseppe Battaglia, the Bishop of Faenza, in which he revealed that he knew he would emerge from the conclave with the tiara.  From Rome, Roncalli wrote to the Bishop, in whose diocese his nephew, Don Battista, was in residence.  Nepotism was alleged to have plagued the Pacelli pontificate.  Eager to avoid giving the impression that he might be inclined to dispense favors to his family, Roncalli wrote to Bishop Battaglia, asking him to keep his nephew in Faenza until after the conclave:

“I have already written to him [Don Battista] to say that on no account should he move until he has my approval.  The atmosphere here is foul with verbal malice and the press that the weary old remark is bound to be heard: ‘Here’s the nephew, here come the relatives’ . . .  

“When you have heard that I had to surrender to the darts of the Holy Spirit, expressed through the common will of those gathered there, you can let Don Battista come to Rome with your blessing . . . 

“ . . . would to heaven that this chalice might pass away from me . . . Naturally, not a word to anyone . . .”  

Peter Hubblethwaite, confirmed Roncalli’s certainty over his imminent victory, as:

 “no longer a question of perhaps or maybe.”  

So sure was Roncalli of his eventual triumph in the conclave (one way or another), that when the final ballot was tallied, his “election” announced, and the question of his acceptance of office put to him, he delivered a lengthy speech, evidently prepared beforehand.  Instead of the simple “Accepto” customarily pronounced by popes-elect, Roncalli jubilantly declared:  

“Listening to your voice, ‘I have been made to tremble and am afraid.’”  (This quotation is from the ninth response, the Libera, in the office of the Dead).

“What I know of my poverty and littleness suffices for my confusion.  But seeing in the votes of my very eminent brother Cardinals of our Holy Roman Church the sign of the will of God, I accept the election that has been made and I bend my head and back to the chalice of bitterness and to the yoke of the Cross.  In the solemnity of Christ the King we all sang, ‘The Lord is our Judge; The Lord is our Legislator; The Lord is our King; He will save us!” 

When asked what name he would adopt as “pope,” Roncalli continued his speech:

“Venerable Brothers, I shall be called John.  This name is sweet to Us because it was Our father’s; it is dear because it was the name of the humble parish in which We received baptism.  It is the solemn name of the innumerable cathedrals spread about the world, and, first among them, of the sacrosanct Lateran Basilica, Our cathedral.

“It is the name which in the long series of the Roman Pontiffs has been most used.  Indeed, there have been twenty-two unquestionably legitimate supreme Pontiffs named John.  Nearly all had a brief pontificate.  We have preferred to shield the smallness of Our own name behind this magnificent succession of Roman Pontiffs.  And was not St. Mark, the Evangelist, the glory and protector of Our most dear Venice, he whom St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles and first Bishop of the Roman Church, loved as his own son, also called John?

But we love the name of John, so dear to us, and to all the Church, particularly because it was borne by two men who were most close to Christ the Lord, the divine redeemer of all the world and founder of the Church.  John the Baptist, the precursor of our Lord he was not, indeed the light, but the witness of the light.  And he was truly the unconquered witness of truth, justice, liberty, in his preaching, in the baptism of repentance, in the blood he shed.  And the other John: the disciple and evangelist, preferred by Christ and by his most sweet mother, who, at the last supper, leaned on the breast of our Lord and thereby obtained that charitable love which burned in him with the lively and apostolic flame until great old age.  May God dispose that both these Johns shall plead in all the Church for Our most humble pastoral ministry, which succeeds that so well conducted one to its end by Our lamented predecessor of venerable memory, Pius XII, and those of his predecessors so glorious in the Church.

“May they proclaim to the clergy and to all the people Our work by which We desire to ‘make ready the way of the Lord, make straight his paths.  Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and the crooked ways shall be made straight, and the rough ways smooth; and all mankind shall see the salvation of God.’  

“And may John the Evangelist, who, as he himself attests, took with him Mary the mother of Christ and our mother, sustain together with her this same exhortation, which concerns the life and the joy of the Catholic Church and also the peace and the prosperity of all peoples:  ‘My children, love one another; love one another because this is the great commandment of the Lord.’

“Venerable Brothers, may God in his mercy grant that bearing the name of the first of this series of supreme Pontiffs, We can, with the help of divine grace, have his sanctity of life and his strength of soul unto the shedding of Our blood, if God so wills.” 

Plugging the leaks 

By the evening of October 28, after three days of balloting, another notice would break that a pope had been elected. Then, after an unusually long delay, the name of the obscure Angelo Roncalli was finally announced and was greeted by the secular and largely anti-Catholic media with gushy exuberance.  Roncalli wasted no time in taking control.  For as soon as he returned from the customary balcony appearance, he quickly summoned the conclavists back to the Sistine Chapel for an unusual overnight, post-election session.  Fr. Perrotta described the scene:

“Surprisingly, he [John XXIII] extended the conclave, requiring all the Cardinals to remain in their Vatican quarters overnight.  Many of the conclavists, assigned to service, presuming that the conclave was broken following the news of the election, had left their quarters to witness the giving of his first public blessing.  According to law, they immediately incurred excommunication.  [This is incorrect, since the conclave ends once the Cardinals have paid their second obedience to the new Pope, just below to his appearance on the balcony.]  When it dawned on them that they had incurred the excommunication because they had left before official leave had been given to them, these conclavists—among them some priests and nuns—realized they were really outlaws.  When the new Pope heard about it, he called them together and started sternly with: ‘You have all incurred excommunication.’  Then, seeing how penitent and crestfallen they were, he smiled and took the black cloud away with:  ‘I shall use my new authority in your behalf.  I free you of the excommunication.’ 

“The conclave was declared over at ten o’clock the next morning . . .” 

The hammer of  “excommunication” threatened against the conclavists who had left their posts, was also brandished against outsiders—prelates of high rank not excluded—who sought entrance to the Sistine Chapel after the election was over:

“[John XXIII] . . . commanded the Cardinals to remain in conclave with him . . . so that he could consult with them . . . But the command was not at once communicated to the outside world.  The announcement of the new pontiff was made at four forty-five, from the balcony of St. Peter’s.  [Archbishop]  Tardini, the acting secretary of state, assumed that the conclave was now over and, together with a cluster of senior officials, burst into the sealed area to make his mark with his new master.  This aroused the . . . anger of [Cardinal] Tisserant, who excommunicated Tardini on the spot—the canonical punishment for interrupting a conclave. . . . Pope John . . . lifted the penalty the next day. . .  it was . . . the first sign, and a disturbing one, to the monsignori of the Curia that the Church had entered a new age.”  

No opportunity for slips to the outside world, of what had happened, could be tolerated.  Roncalli sequestered the conclavists within the Vatican for another 16 hours, after it was certain that there had been no news reports about the earlier, vitiated election that could be corroborated by one of the eyewitnesses.  Roncalli’s likely activity during the quarantine would have been to renew stern warnings to the conclavists against any breach of secrecy (lest some damaging details might leak out, exposing the irregular events to the public).

Despite the security crackdown, rumors were soon flying in Rome regarding a conclave irregularity.  In an effort to quell the circulating reports, during one of his first audiences, Roncalli publicly announced: 

“ . . .  it is pleasant to see how interested the world is in the papacy, and to discover what is being said, for example, about the Conclave . . . Attempts have been made to pierce through the secrecy of the Conclave, . . . But I do not find a line of truth in any of these stories.  I know that the efforts of the journalists have been formidable, but the silence will be even more strongly preserved.”  

Finally, when no serious opposition was mounted against the electoral fraud, the Siri Papacy, which seemed so inevitable just three days before, appeared to be put on hold, while Roncalli took center stage.  The reformers’ candidate, who had been erroneously described by Father Perrotta as a “neutral,” was now firmly in place.  There would follow from that time to the present day an endless barrage of books and articles white-washing the 1958 Conclave and popularizing the “pontiff’ it had seemingly chosen.

Would the Cardinals lie about whom they had elected pope?
    
It would not be the first time, because of fear, that the entire College of Cardinals had deceived the public about the results of a papal election.  In 1378, the Cardinals elected to the supreme pontificate, Bartolomeo Prignano, the archbishop of Bari, who would take the name, Urban VI (1378-89).  But minutes later, the electors became afraid when they considered the reaction to their choice by a Roman mob outside that had been demanding that the conclave elect a Roman as pope.  When the mob burst into the conclave, and threatened to burn down the structure and all those inside unless they were given confirmation of the election a Roman pope, the frightened Cardinals announced that they had chosen the Roman Cardinal Tibaldeschi, instead of Prignano.  For a short time, the people of Rome thought that Tibaldeschi was the new Pope, but only learned the truth after the Cardinals had fled to safety.  The confusion and bitterness that resulted from that one lie, caused the forty-year long Great Western Schism, which produced a succession of four antipopes and brought the Church to the brink of ruin.  The 20th Century version of the incident would have remarkably similar repercussions.  (See chapter: “The Antipopes from 217 to 1449”.)

As if to reflect upon the deception that had followed in the wake of the 1958 Conclave, Giuseppe Siri would remark twenty years later:

“You get all those old cardinals gathered in one room in the heat of Rome, and they just can’t take it . . .  They’ll install anyone on the throne just to get out.”  

By “anyone,” Siri seems to have implied: someone other than the Pope. 

The disgust of New York’s Cardinal Spellman, over the results of the conclave, was too much for him to contain.  Upon his return from Rome, he denounced Roncalli in front of his aides:

“He’s no pope . . . He should be selling bananas.”  

How the deadlock may have been broken

How was the paralysis of the electors over putting an antipope on the Chair of Peter finally overcome?  What soothed the consciences of the Cardinals who would invalidly promote Roncalli to the papal throne?    Was it because Roncalli was 77 years old and not expected to live too long?  Were the Cardinals aware that he was already sick with the pancreatic cancer that would soon take his life?

On February 24, 1998, Fr. Jean-Maria Char-Roux gave additional details regarding the 1958 Conclave to a priest assisting the Siri investigation, while the former still resided in London.    According to Fr. Char-Roux, Roncalli “wanted to hold a council,” as soon as possible after the conclave, for the alleged purpose of “regularizing” his “pontificate.”  Moreover, he said that Roncalli’s choice of the name “John XXIII” was a tacit acknowledgement to the Cardinals that his “election” as “pope” was “irregular.”  For it was an allusion to the fifteenth-century antipope of the same name and number, who had participated at the Council of Constance, convened in 1415, by Emperor Sigismund, in the hope that his claim to office would become legitimized by the council fathers of his time.  ( See chapter: “The Antipopes from 217 to 1449.”) 

Because there had been outside interference against the duly-elected Pope, the election was vitiated, and thus, there was nothing the Cardinals could do during the remainder of the conclave to validate their final, alternative selection of Roncalli.  Therefore, the Cardinals may well have settled on a plan to legitimize Roncalli a few months after the conclave.   Roncalli’s ruse of a council, to effect his “regularization,” may have been an option contemplated by the Cardinals.  But it would have to be carried out in such a way that the faithful would not realize that they had been previously deceived.  For, there was a certain mentality, which was deeply engrained in the hierarchy at the time, that scandal had to be avoided at all cost, even at the expense of truth.

Unlike the previous John XXIII, this latter-day antipope would not be known as such to the outside world.   While Roncalli’s sympathy for the Modernists may have been suspected by some of the Cardinals, they were unaware that he was an agent-provocateur for Freemasonry.   In any event, Roncalli was 77-years old, and the thought that the problem of an antipope would soon “take care of itself” may have provided solace for the conscience-ridden electors.  The Cardinals would only have to perpetrate the lie for a short time, then everything would be normalized again, or so they may have thought.    

Could a pope not know he was pope?

To all appearances, Siri recognized John XXIII as Pope.  Siri (and perhaps the other Cardinals) evidently believed that his public recognition of Roncalli was an integral part of the process of “regularizing” the antipope.  Perhaps he patterned his actions after, Pope Silverius (536-37) who, after his imprisonment by the Monophysites, wrote a letter acknowledging the usurper, Vigilius (who had been put on the papal chair by the Pope’s captors).  Most of the Catholic world at that time, as well as the history writers thereafter, regarded Vigilius as the true Pope.  But, although it was Silverius’ desire that the Church not be left without a functioning head, this would not have been sufficient to allow him to transfer his office to Vigilius.  For, Silverius had acted under duress, and since a forced resignation of a pope is invalid, Vigilius could not be “regularized” while Silverius still lived.  For a forced abdication is no abdication at all.  This principle, which was apparently ignored by Siri and his supporters, is affirmed by Church law:

“ . . . a valid abdication of the Pope must be a free act, hence a forced resignation of the papacy would be null and void, as more than one ecclesiastical decree has declared.” 

Vigilius (537-55) was eventually confirmed in his possession of the See of Peter, but not validly, until the death of Silverius.  With few exceptions, these facts had not been clearly delineated by Church historians, and thus, may not have been fully understood by the Church’s leaders in 1958, including, Giuseppe Siri.  For, if the Pope in 537 could have been confused over his inability to abdicate under pressure, why couldn’t another pope be confounded on the same issue in 1958? 

The “secret” of the council

Such questions would underscore the need of a synod to resolve the issue of papal continuity in the wake of the vitiated conclave.  The plans for Roncalli’s “regularization” may have been discussed during the numerous closed-door meetings held in Rome, in preparation for the council.  Secret conferences for that purpose, hidden from the public, may have also been attempted during the council.  Following its first session, Giuseppe Siri himself said:

 “ . . . I am bound by the secret of the council.  But I have written down a full account of the council as I saw it.  It is in the archives of my house, to be kept until after I have passed on.  The Holy Father himself [John XXIII?] asked me to compose such an account.”  

A Roman Synod 

The conducting of a Roman synod would be primarily reserved to the Cardinals, since each cardinal, including those from outside of Italy, is assigned his own titular church from among those located in the Eternal City.  Secret conferences had been held between Roncalli and some of the papal princes about the mechanics of holding such a synod.  But then on 25 January 1959, three months after the conclave, John XXIII suddenly and publicly announced his plan to the Cardinals to expand the Roman Synod to include a grandiose “ecumenical council,” which would be thrown open to all the Bishops of the world, with far-reaching, yet ambiguously defined goals:

“Venerable Brothers and Dear Sons . . . though admittedly trembling with emotion, yet at the same time with a humble resoluteness of purpose, we pronounce before you the name and plan of this double consultation, a Diocesan Synod for Rome and an Ecumenical Council for the Universal Church. . . We earnestly pray for a good beginning, continuation, and successful outcome of these proposals, which involve hard work directed toward light, improvement, and joy for all Christian peoples, toward a renewed invitation to the faithful of the individual religious groups, for them also to follow us with friendly courtesy in this seeking after unity and grace which so many souls from every part of the earth eagerly desire.”  

The initial reactions of the Cardinals were less than enthusiastic.  Their first expression of resistance to the idea was described by Vatican-observer, Xavier Rynne (Fr. Francis X. Murphy) who was highly sympathetic to John XXIII:

“This occurred on January 25, 1959 and came from a group of close associates, following the celebration of a Mass for Church unity in the Benedictine monastery at the basilica of St. Paul’s Outside the Walls.  The Pope gathered round him the eighteen cardinals present for the occasion and talked to them intimately of the affairs of the Church.  He first told them of his intention to hold a local Synod for the diocese of Rome, to renew the Christian way of life in the center of Christendom.  Then turning his attention to world conditions, he painted a brief and vivid picture of the good and evil influences struggling to control the contemporary world.  He pointed to the sanctity and the moral confusion that exist side-by-side in villages, cities, and nations throughout the world, and to the continual temptation facing modern man to make an idol of scientific progress.  In order to proclaim the truth, he said, and to reanimate the faith of Christians, and thereby to contribute to the well being of the world here and now, he had decided to call a Council of the Universal Church.  Then he turned to the Cardinals, and said simply: ‘I would like to have your advice.’  The Cardinals to a man sat mute before him.  Not a single word of response was uttered.

“The Pope has candidly recorded his disappointment: ‘humanly we could have expected that the Cardinals, after hearing our allocution, might have crowded around to express approval and good wishes . . .’ 

Early resistance to Roncalli’s council
  
Not only the Cardinals, but not a few bishops as well had openly questioned the wisdom of such a project being undertaken by the 77-year old Roncalli.  To some, there appeared to be no pressing reason for holding a general council at that time.  When, on 20 January 1959, Roncalli first mentioned his idea for convoking a council to Cardinal Tardini, his newly appointed Secretary of State, Tardini thought Roncalli had gone “temporarily mad.” 

Tardini, of course, had not been made a “cardinal” until after the conclave.  Thus, he was not present during the irregular election of John XXIII, and, at first, may not have been aware of the actual urgency to hold a council to “regularize” Roncalli’s election.  Xavier Rynne had claimed that Tardini’s original reply to Roncalli’s call for a council was positive, but that he subsequently had second thoughts:

“Cardinal Tardini’s original response to the Pope’s inspiration regarding the Council was immediate and sincere . . . It is probable that later the Cardinal had serious doubts about the feasibility of so vast an undertaking as an Ecumenical Council and, more particularly, about directing it primarily at the reunion of Christians.  It is believed to be Tardini who first broached the idea of the Roman Synod, perhaps as a delaying tactic, or more likely as a pilot-project to give the Pope and the Curia some notion of the complexities involved in organizing a world wide Synod.  Little by little, Vatican officials began to face the pontiff with stiff objections to the idea of the Council, its objectives, and the possibility of holding it within a few years.  Some serious-minded counselors were convinced that ten, even twenty, years of preparation were necessary. 

To block the Holy Ghost

For the plotters’ inner circle, there had been one consideration of overwhelmingly greater importance to their program than any preference of one papal candidate over another.  It was their urgency to silence the Church’s immutable and living teaching authority on faith and morals.  For Christ's promise to speak to His Church until the end of time through the perennial office of the papacy was not conditional upon the personality of its occupant.  Any eligible cardinal duly elected as Pope would be endowed with the Divine charism of infallibility and would continue to reflect, as a beacon, the Light of Christ upon the whole world.  This Light, as manifest through the person of Pope Pius XII, had attracted hundreds of thousands of converts to the Catholic Church, most notably in America, and created an immovable bulwark against the establishment of a de-Christianized, socialist Western Europe, envisioned by Judeo-Freemasonry.  The Lodge may well have feared that the papacy under the leadership of a demonstrably devout Giuseppe Siri would have perpetuated and vitalized this phenomenon.  But even a not-so-holy pope would have posed an obstacle to their schemes.

What was needed was an antipope, for it was known that false popes did not enjoy the Heavenly guidance and protection bestowed upon their authentic counter-parts.  Some of the antipopes had actually taught heresy.  Therefore, the teachings of an antipope who was previously predisposed to the Masonic agenda could be tailored according to the desires of the Masonic agents already highly placed within the Vatican, with no direct interference from the Holy Ghost.  Consequently, the electoral manipulators had to ensure that their candidate would be invalidly elected, to guarantee their future influence over his pronouncements, while they depended on conclave secrecy to facilitate their escape from later inquiry and discovery.  They had no intention of legitimizing Roncalli at a synod (nor would such have likely been possible), but used the election emergency as a ploy to get the reluctant Cardinals to endorse the council, which would be employed instead to unleash a revolution in the Church.  

This could be successfully carried out only if the clergy and laity around the world could be deceived into believing that the antipope was really the true Pope.  Once in power, they would only gradually unveil their true objectives, or otherwise risk a universal outcry from the faithful. The false Pope would proceed to appoint a whole-complement of false cardinals, who could only breed more antipopes, so that after all the true Cardinals had died off, there would remain no normal, canonical means of electing a true pope.  If they were found out in forty years, what would it matter?  By then, nothing could be done, for Apostolic Succession would be irretrievably lost, or so they hoped.  They had seemingly thought of everything.  But they had not taken into account the promise of Christ: “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build My Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.”  

Who was the “Shepherd and Sailor”?

Of all the questions about the 1958 Conclave, which still beg for answers, there is one (at least for this writer) which seems to hold the key to the rest.  To whom did St. Malachy’s prophecy, “Shepherd and Sailor,” apply?  All three prelates in question, Siri, Tedeschini, and Roncalli, had  been archbishops of famous seaports—Genoa, Lepanto, and Venice, respectively. But during the preparation of this chapter, an interesting, though not conclusive, fact was uncovered: Tedeschini was born on the anniversary of Columbus’ discovery of America in 1492.  Hence, 12 October, which is both Cardinal Tedeschini’s birthday and Columbus Day is a date of great significance to the “Shepherd and Sailor.”  Later however, another set of dates was found that seemed far more astounding.  The day upon which Christopher Columbus died, 20 May 1506, coincided exactly four hundred years later with the day on which Cardinal Siri was born: 20 May 1906.